# Colemann-Weinberg Inflation (CWI)

# Theoretical Justifications

The potential of this model was first introduced by Coleman and Weinberg in Ref. [394], in the context of spontaneous symmetry breaking generated by radiative corrections. The starting point of this work is to calculate the effective potential for a massless charged meson minimally coupled to the electrodynamic field.

In that reference, the effective action is explicitly constructed from a Legendre transform of the partition function, and expanded into one-particle-irreducible Feynman diagrams with  $n$  external lines (and summing up over  $n$ ). The exact knowledge of the effective potential requires an infinite summation of all these Feynman diagrams, which is in practice intractable.

It is thus made use of the one loop expansion method where all diagrams with no closed loops are first summed, then all diagrams with one closed loop are added, and all higher loops diagrams neglected. Starting with a quartic interacting scalar field, and requiring that the renormalized mass vanishes, one obtains a potential of the form

$$
V (\phi) \propto 1 + \alpha \left(\frac {\phi}{Q}\right) ^ {4} \ln \left(\frac {\phi}{Q}\right). \tag {5.161}
$$

Let us emphasize that another useful frame of approximation is the Gaussian effective potential method. The Gaussian effective potential is a non-perturbative approach to quantum field theory [395-403], originally developed in the context of quantum mechanics, and generalized to field theory afterwards. In quantum mechanics, when studying systems governed by Hamiltonians of the form  $H = p^2 / 2 + V(\phi)$ , the idea is to calculate an effective potential  $V_{\mathrm{GEP}}$  defined as

$$
V _ {\mathrm {G E P}} \left(\phi_ {0}\right) = \min  _ {\Omega} \left[ \langle \psi | H | \psi \rangle , \psi (\phi) = \left(\frac {\Omega}{\hbar \pi}\right) ^ {1 / 4} e ^ {- \Omega \left(\phi - \phi_ {0}\right) ^ {2} / (2 \hbar)} \right], \tag {5.162}
$$

i.e. the minimum possible quantum mean energy of a Gaussian wavefunction centered over  $\phi_0$ . Such an object turns out to be a powerful tool to addressing the effects of quantum fluctuations on the physical behavior of a system in a non-perturbative way. It can be easily generalized to quantum field theories, expanding the field operator  $\Phi$  only over  $\Omega$ -massive excitations around the classical value  $\phi_0$  in  $d$  dimensions,

$$
\Phi (t, \boldsymbol {x}) = \phi_ {0} + (2 \pi) ^ {(1 - d) / 2} \int \frac {\mathrm {d} ^ {d - 1} \boldsymbol {k}}{\sqrt {2 \sqrt {k ^ {2} + \Omega^ {2}}}} \left(a _ {\boldsymbol {k}} e ^ {- i \sqrt {k ^ {2} + \Omega^ {2}} t + i \boldsymbol {k} \cdot \boldsymbol {x}} + a _ {\boldsymbol {k}} ^ {\dagger} e ^ {i \sqrt {k ^ {2} + \Omega^ {2}} t - i \boldsymbol {k} \cdot \boldsymbol {x}}\right), \tag {5.163}
$$

where  $a_{k}^{\dagger}$  and  $a_{k}$  are the usual creation and annihilation operators, and minimizing the quantum mean value of the Hamiltonian density over  $\Omega$ . In Ref. [396], the quartic interacting scalar field has been worked out with this method, i.e. starting from  $V(\phi) = m^{2}\phi^{2} / 2 + \lambda \phi^{4}$ . The Gaussian effective potential  $V_{\mathrm{GEP}}$  obtained in this way can be expanded in power of  $\hbar$  to show that the first order terms match with the potential of Coleman and Weinberg. This is not surprising as this is equivalent of performing a one loop expansion over the effective action. However, it should be stressed that the Gaussian effective potential method provides a much more general expression for the potential, that is valid beyond this perturbative limit and that can address regimes where quantum diffusion dominates the dynamics of the scalar field.

The model is defined such that inflation ends by violation of the slow-roll conditions, and is followed by a preheating stage in which the inflaton field oscillates at the bottom of its potential. Therefore this potential minimum must be set to zero, which implies

$$
\alpha = 4 e. \tag {5.164}
$$

One is thus left with one mass parameter,  $Q$ , which sets the typical vev at which inflation takes place. On the other hand, the value taken for  $Q$  also depends on the underlying high energy model from which the CW potential emerges.

The CWI potential appears in various other contexts and, in fact, historically, it was the first model of inflation ever proposed [30] (also known as "old inflation"). The idea was that inflation occurs while the field is trapped in a false vacuum state  $\langle \phi \rangle = 0$ . Then,

inflation comes to an end when the field tunnels from this state to the symmetry breaking true minimum. Unfortunately, this models was quickly realized to be ruled out since the above mentioned process is accompanied by bubble formation and these bubbles, while colliding, produce too large inhomogeneities. Then, this problem was solved by a modification of the old inflation scenario called "new inflation" [31, 32]. The main idea is that inflation does not occur while the field is trapped but when the field is rolling down from the origin to its true minimum. Bubbles are also formed but there are so big that our entire universe is contained in one of them. As a consequence, we do not observe bubble collisions and our universe is extremely homogeneous as indicated by the observations. This new inflationary scenario was explicitly implemented in Ref. [31] where the  $\mathrm{SU}(5)\rightarrow \mathrm{SU}(3)\times \mathrm{SU}(2)\times \mathrm{U}(1)$  phase transition in GUTs is investigated. The model makes use of a CWI potential that can be described by

$$
V (\phi) = \frac {5 6 2 5}{5 1 2 \pi^ {2}} g ^ {4} \left[ \phi^ {4} \ln \left(\frac {\phi}{\phi_ {0}}\right) - \frac {\phi^ {4}}{4} + \frac {\phi_ {0} ^ {4}}{4} \right], (5. 1 6 5)
$$

where  $\phi_0\simeq 10^{14} - 10^{15}\mathrm{GeV}$ , representing the GUT symmetry breaking scale, and  $g^2\simeq 1 / 3$  is the SU(5) gauge coupling constant. However, as noticed afterwards in Refs. [404-408], this model has also a fatal flaw. Indeed, one sees in Eq. (5.165) that the overall normalization of the potential reads  $M^4 = 5625g^4\phi_0^4 /(2048\pi^2)$  and that, therefore, the amplitude of the fluctuations is in fact already fixed. Using the value of the SU(5) coupling constant and  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} = e^{1 / 4}\phi_0 / M_{\mathrm{Pl}}\simeq 5\times 10^{-5} - 5\times 10^{-4}$ , one arrives at  $M^4\simeq \left(10^{-13} - 10^{-17}\right)M_{\mathrm{Pl}}^4$ . This turns out to be incompatible with the CMB normalization [see Eq. (5.173) below]. However, the same model was re-considered in Refs. [407, 409] (see also Ref. [410]), but with additional fields and couplings. It was then shown that the scale  $M$  acquires a different form and can scale as the inverse of the coupling constants. Since these ones are small, it becomes possible to obtain a higher value for  $M$  and to correctly CMB normalize the model. In what follows, we will therefore consider the scale  $M$  as a free parameter fixed by the overall amplitude of the cosmological fluctuations.

We also notice that, in Ref. [411], the CWI potential is obtained in the context of Kaluza-Klein inflation, i.e. in higher dimensions and with higher derivative terms and logarithmic dependence on the curvature scalar. Again, the typical value for  $Q\simeq 10^{15}\mathrm{GeV}$ . The CWI potential appears also in Ref. [412], but the value used for  $Q$  is rather different,  $Q = 0.223M_{\mathrm{Pl}}$ , and is fine-tuned in order to have two phases of inflation, a "chaotic inflationary" phase followed by a "new inflationary" phase. Finally, in Ref. [413], the Coleman-Weinberg potential is studied in the framework of Einstein-Brans-Dicke gravity, with the same typical value for  $Q\simeq 10^{15}\mathrm{GeV}$  and the same typical value for  $M^4 /M_{\mathrm{Pl}}^4\simeq 10^{-15}$  as in the original paper.

# Slow-Roll Analysis

Considering the previous considerations, we take the potential to be

$$
V (\phi) = M ^ {4} \left[ 1 + \alpha \left(\frac {\phi}{Q}\right) ^ {4} \ln \left(\frac {\phi}{Q}\right) \right], \tag {5.166}
$$

with a parameter  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}}$  in the range  $[10^{-5}, 10^{-3}]$  and  $\alpha = 4e$ . As already mentioned, the mass parameter  $M$  will be viewed as free and fixed by the normalization to the amplitude of the CMB anisotropies. The potential is displayed in Fig. 22. It starts decreasing with the inflaton  $vev$  at  $\phi = 0$ , reaches a minimum at  $\phi / Q = e^{-1/4}$  where it vanishes, and then

increases and diverges as  $\phi$  goes to  $\infty$ . As mentioned above, inflation proceeds along the decreasing branch of the potential, in the direction specified by the arrow in the figure.

Let us now derive the first slow-roll parameters. Defining  $x \equiv \phi / Q$ , they are given by

$$
\epsilon_ {1} = \frac {M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}}{Q ^ {2}} \frac {\alpha^ {2}}{2} x ^ {6} \left(\frac {1 + 4 \ln x}{1 + \alpha x ^ {4} \ln x}\right) ^ {2}, \tag {5.167}
$$

while

$$
\epsilon_ {2} = 2 \frac {M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}}{Q ^ {2}} \alpha x ^ {2} \frac {- 7 - 1 2 \ln x + \alpha x ^ {4} + \alpha x ^ {4} \ln x + 4 \alpha x ^ {4} \ln^ {2} x}{(1 + \alpha x ^ {4} \ln x) ^ {2}}, \tag {5.168}
$$

and finally

$$
\begin{array}{l} \epsilon_ {3} = \frac {M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}}{Q ^ {2}} \left(- 2 6 \alpha x ^ {2} + 2 1 \alpha^ {2} x ^ {6} - 2 \alpha^ {3} x ^ {1 0} - 1 2 8 \alpha x ^ {2} \ln x \right. \\ + 1 5 2 \alpha^ {2} x ^ {6} \ln x - 1 1 \alpha^ {3} x ^ {1 0} \ln x - 9 6 \alpha x ^ {2} \ln^ {2} x \\ + 3 6 8 \alpha^ {2} x ^ {6} \ln^ {2} x - 1 4 \alpha^ {3} x ^ {1 0} \ln^ {2} x + 3 8 4 \alpha^ {2} x ^ {6} \ln^ {3} x \tag {5.169} \\ - 1 6 \alpha^ {3} x ^ {1 0} \ln^ {3} x - 3 2 \alpha^ {3} x ^ {1 0} \ln^ {4} x) (1 + \alpha x ^ {4} \ln x) ^ {- 2} \\ \times \left(7 - \alpha x ^ {4} + 1 2 \ln x - \alpha x ^ {4} \ln x - 4 \alpha x ^ {4} \ln^ {2} x\right) ^ {- 1}. \\ \end{array}
$$

The three of them have the same general behavior. They vanish at  $x = 0$ , increase with  $x$  in the decreasing branch of the potential and diverge at the minimum of the potential. Then they decrease from infinity in the increasing branch of the potential, and reach asymptotically vanishing values when the field  $vev$  goes to infinity. Inflation stops by slow-roll violation when  $\epsilon_{1} = 1$ . The value of  $x$  at which this happens needs to be determined numerically, but in the limit  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \ll 1$  (remember that  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \simeq 10^{-4}$ ) where one expects  $x_{\mathrm{end}} \ll 1$ , one can derive an analytic approximated formula, namely

$$
x _ {\text {e n d}} \simeq e ^ {- 1 / 4} \exp \left[ \mathrm {W} _ {- 1} \left(- \frac {3 \sqrt {2}}{4 \alpha} \frac {Q}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}}} e ^ {3 / 4}\right) \right], \tag {5.170}
$$

where  $\mathrm{W}_{-1}$  is the -1 branch of the Lambert function. A comparison between this approximated formula and the numerical solution for  $x_{\mathrm{end}}$  is displayed in Fig. 23. The agreement is excellent.

Let us now calculate the slow-roll trajectory from Eq. (3.11). It is given by

$$
\begin{array}{l} N _ {\mathrm {e n d}} - N = \frac {Q ^ {2}}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}} \frac {\sqrt {e}}{4 \alpha} \left[ \mathrm {E i} \left(- \frac {1}{2} - 2 \ln x\right) - \mathrm {E i} \left(- \frac {1}{2} - 2 \ln x _ {\mathrm {e n d}}\right) \right] \\ + \frac {Q ^ {2}}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}} \frac {1}{1 6 \sqrt {e}} \left[ \operatorname {E i} \left(\frac {1}{2} + 2 \ln x _ {\text {e n d}}\right) - \operatorname {E i} \left(\frac {1}{2} + 2 \ln x\right) \right] \tag {5.171} \\ + \frac {1}{8} \frac {Q ^ {2}}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}} \left(x ^ {2} - x _ {\mathrm {e n d}} ^ {2}\right), \\ \end{array}
$$

where  $\operatorname{Ei}$  is the exponential integral function,  $N_{\mathrm{end}}$  is the number of  $e$ -folds at the end of inflation and  $N$  is the number of  $e$ -folds corresponding to the scaled field  $vevx$ . In the  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \ll 1$  limit where  $x \ll 1$ , the first term of this expression dominates. Since  $\alpha = 4e$ , the previous expression can be slightly simplified:

$$
\begin{array}{l} N _ {\text {e n d}} - N = \frac {Q ^ {2}}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}} \frac {1}{1 6 \sqrt {e}} \left[ \operatorname {E i} \left(- \frac {1}{2} - 2 \ln x\right) - \operatorname {E i} \left(- \frac {1}{2} - 2 \ln x _ {\text {e n d}}\right) \right. \tag {5.172} \\ \left. + \operatorname {E i} \left(\frac {1}{2} + 2 \ln x _ {\mathrm {e n d}}\right) - \operatorname {E i} \left(\frac {1}{2} + 2 \ln x\right) \right] + \frac {1}{8} \frac {Q ^ {2}}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}} \left(x _ {\mathrm {e n d}} ^ {2} - x ^ {2}\right). \\ \end{array}
$$

After having solved the above equation for  $x_{*}$ , the field value at which the pivot scale crossed the Hubble radius during inflation,  $M$  is fixed by the amplitude of the CMB anisotropies to

$$
\left(\frac {M}{M _ {\mathrm {P l}}}\right) ^ {4} = 7 2 0 \pi^ {2} \alpha^ {2} \frac {M _ {\mathrm {P l}} ^ {2}}{Q ^ {2}} x _ {*} ^ {6} (1 + 4 \ln x _ {*}) ^ {2} \left(1 + \alpha x _ {*} ^ {4} \ln x _ {*}\right) ^ {- 3} \frac {Q _ {\mathrm {r m s - P S}} ^ {2}}{T ^ {2}}. \tag {5.173}
$$

The reheating consistent slow-roll predictions of the Coleman-Weinberg models are displayed Fig. 138 in the physical range  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \in [10^{-5}, 10^{-3}]$ . The reheating equation of state parameter  $\overline{w}_{\mathrm{reh}}$  has been taken to 0 since the potential is quadratic close to its minimum  $V(x) \simeq 2\alpha M^4 e^{-1/2} (x - e^{-1/4})^2$ . The typical predicted amount of gravitational waves is extremely small, and a non-negligible deviation from  $n_{\mathrm{S}} = 1$  is noticed. Also, one could choose to relax the constraint on the parameter  $Q$  and study the Coleman-Weinberg potential in general. This was done for instance in Ref. [409] where the Coleman-Weinberg potential predictions are compared with the WMAP observations on general grounds. It is found that the potential normalization should be of the order  $M \simeq 10^{16} \mathrm{GeV}$ , and that  $Q \simeq 10M_{\mathrm{Pl}}$  in order to match  $n_{\mathrm{S}} \simeq 0.96$ . For this reason the reheating consistent slow-roll predictions are displayed in Fig. 139 in the extended range  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \in [1, 100]$ . In the limit  $Q / M_{\mathrm{Pl}} \gg 1$ , the model is well approximated by a quadratic potential around its minimum, and one asymptotically approaches the LFI predictions with  $p = 2$  (see section 5.2).

